Nature Genetics
Technical Report https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01648-9
Methods
Model of individual-level data
Let y be the quantitative phenotype, assumed to be standardized, of 
an individual. We assume that y depends on imputed gene expressions 
and variant genotypes of the individual. We denote Xj the expression 
of the gene j, ̃Xj, as its cis-genetic component, and Gm the genotype of 
the variant m. We assume that ̃Xj is given, imputed from a pretrained 
expression prediction model, and the imputation errors/uncertainty 
would be ignored. We have the following regression model:
y = ∑
j
βj ̃Xj + ∑
m
θmGm + ϵ, (1)
where β j and θ m are the effect sizes of gene expression j and the  
variant m, respectively. ϵ is a normally distributed error term, that is, 
ϵ  ∼ N(0, σ 2), and is assumed to be independent across individuals.  
In practice, we standardize both ̃Xj and Gm to make the variance equal 
to 1 for all the genes and variants.
T o obtain the imputed expressions, we use existing expression 
prediction models. Specifically, the imputed expression of a gene j 
is defined as ∑ lwjlGl, where Gl is the genotype of variant l, and wjl is the 
weight of the lth variant in gene j’s expression prediction model. We 
assume that these weights are given at the standardized scale, that is, 
the weights were derived using standardized variant genotypes. This 
is the case for the FUSION expression models (http://gusevlab.org/
projects/fusion/). When the provided weights are not on the standard-
ized scale, for example, from PredictDB (https://predictdb.org/), these 
weights must be scaled. This can be done by multiplying the weights 
by genotype variances from the LD reference.
We specify different prior distributions of gene effects β j’s, and 
variant effects θm’s. T o describe these priors, we note that our model is 
a special case of a more general regression model, where explanatory 
variables come from multiple groups with different distributions of 
effect sizes.
We write the general model with K  groups of explanatory vari -
ables as
y =
K
∑
k=1
∑
j∈Mk
βjXj + ϵ, (2)
where Xj is jth explanatory variable and j ∈ Mk denotes that it belongs 
to group k. In our case, the model has two groups of variables, imputed 
gene expressions and genetic variants. For simplicity of notation, we 
will use this general model in our following discussions. We assign 
a spike-and-slab prior distribution for the effect of variable j , with 
group-specific prior parameters. Specifically, when j ∈ Mk, we denote 
γ j an indicator of whether Xj has nonzero effect
γj ∼ Bernoulli (πk)
βj|γj = 1 ∼ N(0,σ2
k )
βj|γj = 0 ∼ δ0.
(3)
Here δ 0 is the Dirac’s delta function, πk = P(γ j = 1∣j ∈ Mk) is the prior 
probability of the j th variable from group k  being casual to the trait 
(nonzero effect) and σ2
k
 is the prior variance of the effect size of causal 
variables in the group k.
Inference of the individual-level model
The inference has two main steps. In the first step, we estimate the prior 
parameters θ ={ πk, σ2
k
, k ∈{ 1, 2}}  for the two groups, gene effects and 
variants effects. In the second step, we use the estimated θ, and com-
pute the PIP of each variable, defined as the posterior probability of 
γ j = 1 given all the data and parameters.
The parameter estimation is done by maximum likelihood. Let 
yn×1 be the data of the response variable, where n  is the sample size. 
Let Xn×p = [X1X2…X p] be the data of all the p explanatory variables. The 
likelihood of our model is given by
L(θ; X, y, σ)= P(y|X,θ, σ)= ∑
Γ
P(y|X,Γ, θ, σ)P(Γ|θ), (4)
where Γ  = [γ1, γ2, …, γ p] represents the ‘configuration’ of the causal 
(nonzero effect) status of all variables. We note that σ is the standard 
deviation of the phenotypic variance, and is assumed to be given  
(see below). T o maximize the likelihood, we use the expectation-  
maximization (EM) algorithm. In the E-step, we obtain the expectation 
of log-likelihood over Γ, 𝔼𝔼Γ log P(X,y, Γ|θ(t), σ), where θ (t) is the parameter 
value in the t-th iteration. In the M-step, we update θ (t) using the  
following rules to maximize the expectation from the E-step (Supple-
mentary Note):
π(t+1)
k = 1
|Mk| ∑
j∈Mk
α(t)
j (5)
σ2,(t+1)
k =
∑j∈Mk
α(t)
j ⋅ τ2,(t)
j
∑j∈Mk
α(t)
j
, (6)
where ∣Mk∣ is the number of variables in group k, α(t)
j
= P(γj = 1|X, y, θ(t), σ) 
is the PIP of variable j given data and current parameter values θ(t) and 
τ2,(t)
j = 𝔼𝔼(β
2
j |γj = 1, X, y, θ(t), σ)  is the second moment of the posterior 
effect size of variable j, given that it is a causal variable. The updated 
rules have simple interpretations. The new parameter π(t+1)
k  is simply 
the average PIP of all variables in the group k and the new σ2,(t+1)
k  is the 
weighted average of the second moment of the posterior effect sizes.
Computing α j and τ2
j  at the t-th iteration (we removed superscript 
t from now on for simplicity) using all variables in the genome is com-
putationally challenging. T o reduce the computational burden, we 
divide the genome into LD blocks using LDetect51 with variants approxi-
mately independent between blocks. We assign a gene to an LD block 
if all SNPs in its expression prediction model fall into that block. If the 
variants of the prediction model of any gene span multiple LD blocks, 
we merge all such blocks into a new block. We will then compute αj and 
τ2
j  of the variables in each block independently, while still using all vari-
ables in the genome to update the parameters using Eqs. (5) and (6).
Even within a single block, there may still be hundreds to thou -
sands of variables. This makes it difficult to compute α j and τ2
j , as it 
requires marginalization of Γ. T o address this challenge, we first notice 
that our problem is now reduced to standard fine-mapping or Bayesian 
variable selection problem, with different prior distributions of the 
effects of different variables. Therefore, we borrow from fine-mapping 
literature to compute α j and τ2
j  (refs. 19,20; see Supplementary Note 
for details).
After we estimate the prior parameters, we apply SuSiE 19, a 
fine-mapping method, on all variables, including both genes and 
variants, in each block. Note that all blocks, including the large blocks 
pruned in the parameter estimation step, will be analyzed. In applying 
SuSiE, we set the prior probability and prior effect variance of each 
variable, using the estimated parameters of the group (genes or vari-
ants) that this variable belongs to. We allow multiple causal variables 
by setting L = 5 in SuSiE and assigning null weight as 1 − ∑
jpj. SuSiE will 
then return PIPs of all genes and variants in each LD block.
Model of summary statistics
The summary data would include the effect size estimates of variants, 
̂βj , and their standard errors s j, as well as the LD between all pairs of 
variants, denoted as the matrix R. The effect sizes can be standardized, 
denoted as ̂zj = ̂βj/sj . Given that the summary data have only variant 
information, our model would first need to expand the summary data 
to include gene information. Specifically, we compute the marginal 