Nature Genetics
Technical Report https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01648-9
LD reference data
We computed the LD reference panel of common biallelic variants 
using the White British subpopulation of the UK Biobank. This panel 
is an in-sample reference for GWAS summary statistics from the Rapid 
GWAS project31. First, we used plate and well information from the 
genotyping to unambiguously identify over 99% (357,654 of 361,194) 
of the samples used in the Rapid GWAS project in our data. T o ease 
computation, we randomly selected 10% of these samples to serve as 
the LD reference panel59. We also limited our panel to common auto-
somal variants with MAF > 0.01 in the Rapid GWAS analyses. Then, we 
computed correlations between all pairs of variants within each of 
1,700 approximately independent regions. These regions are assumed 
to have low LD between them and are based on previously identified 
regions51 that could be lifted over from hg37 to hg38 positions. The final 
LD reference panel consists of 1,700 correlation matrices and contains 
9,309,375 variants. This LD reference panel was used when analyzing 
all traits, including those that were not measured in the White British 
subpopulation of the UK Biobank.
Harmonization of GWAS data and expression prediction  
models to LD reference. We restricted our analyses to variants that 
were non-missing in the GWAS summary statistics, expression predic-
tion models, and LD reference panel. T o ensure consistency between 
these three datasets, we performed two harmonization procedures. 
The objective of harmonization was to ensure that the reference and 
alternate alleles of each variant are defined consistently across all three 
datasets20. In our case, we must harmonize both the GWAS z-scores and 
the eQTL prediction models to our LD reference, and we use a different 
harmonize procedure for each. These procedures are based in part 
on previous work33. T o describe the two procedures, it is necessary to 
define several cases of inconsistencies that can occur in either dataset. 
The first case is a variant with its reference and alternate alleles ‘flipped’ 
with respect to the LD reference. The GWAS z scores or eQTL weights 
in the prediction model of the flipped variants should have their signs 
reversed to be consistent with the LD reference. The second case is a 
variant that has had its strand ‘switched’ with respect to the LD refer-
ence (for example, variant is G/A in the LD reference but C/T in the other 
dataset). In this case, the reference and alternate alleles are the same, 
just named using different strands. The z scores or weights of switched 
variants should not be changed, as they are already consistent with the 
LD reference. The third case is a variant that is ‘ambiguous’ as to whether 
it is flipped or switched. This occurs when the two alleles of a variant 
are also complementary base pairs (A ↔ T substitutions or G ↔ C). For 
example, let us consider a variant that is A/T in the LD reference and 
T/A. It is unclear when this variant is flipped or switched with respect to 
the LD reference (both result in T/A), and it is ambiguous as to whether 
the signs of the z  scores or weights should be reversed. We say that 
variants are ‘unambiguous’ when they do not involve substitutions of 
complementary base pairs.
T o harmonize the z scores from GWAS summary statistics, we first 
identified all inconsistencies in reference and alternate alleles between 
the z scores and the LD reference. Next, we resolved all unambiguous 
cases of flipped and switched alleles, reversing the sign of z  scores 
that were flipped and taking no action for switched alleles. Then, we 
imputed the z scores for ambiguous variants using all unambiguous 
variants in each of the LD regions60. If the sign of the imputed z score 
did not match the sign of the observed z score, we used the sign of the 
imputed z score, reversing the sign of the observed z score. Note that 
we did not perform the procedure to resolve ambiguous variants when 
analyzing LDL or SBP, as both the summary statistics and LD reference 
panel are derived from UK Biobank data.
T o harmonize the eQTL prediction models, we first identified all 
inconsistencies in reference and alternate alleles between the predic-
tion models and the LD reference. Next, we resolved all unambiguous 
cases of flipped and switched alleles, reversing the sign of weights that 
were flipped and taking no action for switched alleles. These steps to 
resolve unambiguous variants are the same as in the z-score harmoni-
zation procedure. T o resolve ambiguous variants, we leveraged cor-
relations between ambiguous and unambiguous variants in both our 
LD reference panel and the LD panel used to construct the PredictDB 
models. PredictDB reports the covariance between pairs of variants 
within each gene prediction model. For gene prediction models that 
include both ambiguous variants and unambiguous variants, we com-
puted the sum of correlations between each ambiguous variant and 
the unambiguous variants in the prediction model, using both our LD 
reference panel and the LD used for the prediction models. If the sign 
of the total correlation in the LD reference of the prediction models did 
not match the sign of the total correlation in our LD reference panel, 
we reversed the sign of the prediction model weights for the ambigu-
ous variant. If the total correlation in the LD reference was equal to 
zero, then we set the weight of the ambiguous variant to zero, as these 
ambiguous variants did not have any unambiguous variants in the 
same LD region. For gene prediction models that include only a single 
ambiguous variant and no unambiguous variants, we left the sign of 
the prediction model weight unchanged; the resulting gene z score may 
have an incorrect sign, but the magnitude of the z score will be correct. 
We excluded gene prediction models with multiple ambiguous variants 
and no unambiguous variants, as their gene z scores could be incorrect 
in both sign and magnitude. Such exclusions were infrequent, affecting 
less than 1% of liver genes in the LDL analysis (94 of 11,502 genes with 
prediction models).
Performing cTWAS analysis in real data
We used the following cTWAS settings when analyzing real data. For 
parameter estimation, we used the default procedure for selecting the 
starting values of the EM algorithm. We then performed 30 iterations of 
the EM algorithm assuming L = 1 effect (at most a single causal effect) 
in each region, using variants that were thinned by 10% to reduce com-
putation. For computing PIPs of genes and variants, we used thinned 
variants and assumed L = 5 (at most five causal effects) in each region. 
For regions with maximum gene PIP > 0.8, we recomputed PIPs using all 
variants, with L = 5. For this final step, we allowed a maximum of 20,000 
variants in a region to reduce computation; if the maximum number 
of variants was exceeded, we randomly selected 20,000 variants to 
include. Unless specified otherwise, we used the threshold PIP > 0.8 
for declaring significant genes.
Evaluating methods in distinguishing silver standard and 
bystander genes for LDL
Following previous studies35, we assessed the performance of TWAS 
and cTWAS on real data by comparing their ability to distinguish LDL 
silver standard genes from other nearby genes. We defined a set of 
‘bystander’ genes that were within 1 Mb of a silver standard gene. These 
bystander genes would be considered the negative set. We limited our 
analysis to 46 of 69 silver standard genes with imputed expression after 
harmonization, and the 539 imputed bystander genes that are nearby 
these genes. Next, we determined if these silver standard and bystander 
genes were significant by TWAS (Bonferroni) or cTWAS (PIP > 0.8). 
Then, we computed the precision of each method as follows: (number 
of detected silver standard genes)/(number of detected silver standard 
genes + number of detected bystander genes).
Classifying TWAS false-positive genes for LDL by source of 
confounding
T o better understand how TWAS generated false-positive findings, we 
classified whether TWAS false positives as primarily due to confound-
ing by variants or confounding by genes. We defined TWAS false posi-
tives as genes that were significant by TWAS (Bonferroni) but PIP < 0.5 
by cTWAS. T o categorize these false-positive genes, we first assigned 
them to credible sets. These credible sets were reported by cTWAS, 
using the default SuSiE setting, which means that only credible sets with 