Nature Genetics
Technical Report https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01648-9
association of each imputed gene with the GWAS trait, and the correla-
tion of any gene with all other genes and all the variants. These calcula-
tions are described in the Supplementary Note. Once computed, we 
will have marginal associations of all variables, including genes and 
variants, ̂z, and their correlation matrix R . These data would be the 
input of our analysis.
Following the literature20,52, and particularly, the summary statis-
tics version of SuSiE (SuSiE-RSS)20, we have the following model of ̂z:
̂z|z, R ∼ Np(Rz,R), (7)
where z = (z1, z2, …, z p) denotes the ‘standardized’ true effect sizes. We 
use the same spike-and-slab prior for z j—when the variable j  belongs 
to the group k
γj ∼ Bernoulli (πk)
zj|γj = 1 ∼ N (0, σ2
k )
zj|γj = 0 ∼ δ0.
(8)
Again, we denote θ ={ πk, σ2
k
} the prior parameters and Γ the causal 
configuration. We estimate the prior parameters θ by MLE. This can be 
done with the same algorithm used for the individual-level model. 
Specifically, following SuSiE-RSS20, the likelihood function under the 
individual-level data can be rewritten in terms of sufficient statistics 
and s2
j . Then, if we make the following substitutions, the likelihood of 
the individual-level model would be identical to that of the summary 
statistics model. Specifically, we change β = (β 1, β2, …, β p) to z, XTX to 
R, XTy to ̂z, yTy to 1 and n to 1. Also, the prior model of z in the summary 
statistics model is the same as the prior model of β in the individual-level 
model. Therefore, we can use the same EM algorithm and the update 
rules to estimate θ. The update rules follow Eqs. (5) and (6), where the 
PIP of variable j is now defined as α(t)
j = P(γj = 1| ̂z, R, θ(t)) and the second 
moment of the posterior effect τ2,(t)
j = 𝔼𝔼(z2
j |γj = 1, ̂z, R, θ(t)).
Once the parameters were estimated, we followed the same pro-
cedure as in the individual-level model to obtain PIPs of all variables, 
except that SuSiE-RSS is used in fine-mapping.
Estimating proportions of phenotypic variance explained by 
variants and genes
We assume that all the explanatory variables and the response variable 
in the regression model are standardized, with a variance equal to 1. 
Then the proportion of variance explained (PVE) by a single variable, 
j, is simply β2
j ⋅ Var(Xj)/Var(y)= β2
j
. Assuming that we use the z scores in 
the summary statistical model, the effect size is related to z  score by 
βj = zj/√n, where n is the sample size. So, on average, the PVE of a vari-
able in group k  (variant or gene) is 𝔼𝔼(z2
j )= σ2
k /n, where σ k is the prior 
variance of effect size in the group, k, at the z-score scale. The expected 
number of variables with nonzero effects in the group k  is π k ⋅ ∣Mk∣, 
where π k is the prior inclusion probability and ∣ Mk∣ is the group size. 
Putting this together, the PVE by the group k is given by
PVEk = σ2
k ⋅ πk ⋅| Mk|⋅ n−1. (9)
This equation is used to compute PVE from estimated parameters using 
both simulated and real data.
Simulation procedure
In our simulations, we used the following data: (1) genotype data. We 
used genotype data from UK Biobank by randomly selecting 80,000 
samples. We then filtered samples to only keep ‘White British’ , removed 
samples with missing information, mismatches between self-reported 
and genetic sex or ‘outliers’ as defined by UK Biobank. We also removed 
any individuals who have close relatives in the cohort. This ended up 
with a cohort of n = 45,087 samples. We used SNPs from chromosome 
(chr) 1 to chr 22 and selected those with a minor allele frequency of 
>0.05 and at least 95% genotyping rate. After filtering, 6,228,664 SNPs 
remained and were used in our analysis. (2) Gene expression prediction 
models. We used GTEx v7 Adipose tissue dataset. This dataset contains 
8,021 genes with expression models. We used the LASSO weights from 
the FUSION website (http://gusevlab.org/projects/fusion/).
We first impute gene expression for all samples using the predic-
tion models. SNP genotypes are harmonized between the expression 
prediction model and UK Biobank genotypes so that the reference and 
alternate alleles match. SNPs in the FUSION prediction models but not 
in UK Biobank, about 13% of all, were not used in imputing gene expres-
sion. We then sample the causal genes and SNPs under given prior 
inclusion probabilities π k’s and then sample their effect sizes accord-
ingly using the prior variance parameter σ2
k . We then simulate y under 
the model defined in Eq. (1). The prior parameters πk, σ2
k  were chosen 
to reflect the genetic architecture in real data. In particular, it was 
estimated that gene expression mediates about 10–20% of trait herit-
ability25. And the studies using rare variants for complex traits sug -
gested that about 5% of protein-coding genes are likely causal53. Given 
these considerations, we set the prior probability for SNPs to 10 −4  or 
2.5 × 10−4 , and PVE of SNPs to 0.3 or 0.5. For the genes, we set the prior 
probability to 0.015 or 0.05 and PVE of genes from 0.02 to 0.1.
T o test if our method is robust to mis-specified priors for causal 
gene effect, we have also simulated causal gene effect under the mixture 
of normal distributions. For the mixture of normal distributions, we 
used equal mixtures of four normal distributions, each with mean 0 
and standard deviations with ratios of 1:2:4:8. That is for gene j, its prior 
distribution of causal effect size follows: βj|γj = 1 ∼ ∑ω∈[1,2,4,8]π′
(N(0,ωσ′2). The prior probability being a casual gene is, therefore, 4π′ 
and causal effect size variance is 15σ′2. The prior probability of being a 
casual gene and the PVE of genes were set to values as described above.
T o run cTWAS, we performed the association of individual SNPs 
with the trait y, to obtain summary statistics of SNPs ̂zSNP. We randomly 
selected 2,000 samples from the cohort to calculate SNP genotype 
correlation matrix or LD matrix ̂RSNP. We then ran cTWAS summary 
statistics version under each simulation setting with ̂zSNP, ̂RSNP and 
expression prediction models as input. The software will harmonize 
SNP genotypes for ̂zSNP, ̂RSNP and expression prediction models, so that 
the reference and alternate allele match. T o further reduce the com-
putational burden in estimating parameters, we only used one in every 
ten SNPs (SNP thinning) in the EM algorithm. When calculating PIP, we 
first run SuSiE-RSS with L = 5 in each LD Block with thinned SNPs. For 
each block with maximum gene PIP > 0.8, we rerun SuSiE-RSS with L = 5 
with the original SNPs to get the final gene PIPs.
GWAS summary statistics
The LDL and SBP summary statistics were from the UK Biobank, 
computed by the Rapid GWAS project31 using Hail54. These summary 
statistics were downloaded from the IEU OpenGWAS project55 using 
GWAS IDs ‘ukb-d-30780_irnt’ (LDL) and ‘ukb-a-360’ (SBP). Both LDL 
and SBP summary statistics were based on the White British sub -
population of the UK Biobank, with sample sizes of n = 343,621 and 
n = 317,754, respectively. The IBD summary statistics were from the 
International IBD Genetics Consortium56, computed by meta-analysis 
using METAL57. These summary statistics were obtained from IEU 
OpenGWAS using GWAS ID ‘ebi-a-GCST004131’ . IBD includes cases of 
both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. The IBD summary statistics 
were based on nonoverlapping samples of European ancestry with 
a combined sample size of n  = 59,957. The SCZ summary statistics 
were from the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium and the CardiffCOGS 
study58, computed by meta-analysis using METAL57. These summary 
statistics were obtained from the authors via the link provided in the 
manuscript. The SCZ summary statistics were based on nonoverlap -
ping samples of primarily European ancestry with a combined sample  
size of n = 105,318.